--- PAGE 1 ---
C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Comptes Rendus Palevol
w w w.s  ciencedirect.com
General Palaeontology, Systematics, Evolution (Palaeobotany)
Discovery of an Autunian macroﬂora and lithostratigraphic
re-investigation
 on the western border of the Lodève Permian basin
(Mont
 Sénégra, Hérault, France). Paleoenvironmental implications
Découverte d’une ﬂore autunienne et réinvestigation lithostratigraphique dans la
bordure
 occidentale du bassin permien de Lodève (mont Sénégra, Hérault, France).
Conséquences
 paléoenvironnementales
Georges Gand a, Jean Galtier b,∗, Jacques Garric c, Pierre-Alexandre Teboul a,
Pierre Pellenard a
a UMR CNRS/uB 6282, laboratoire biogéosciences, université de Bourgogne, 6, boulevard Gabriel, 21000 Dijon, France
b CNRS, UMR AMAP, CIRAD, TA-A51/PS2, université Montpellier-2, boulevard de la Lironde, 34398 Montpellier cedex 05, France
c 16, rue des Azalées, La Chamberte, 34070 Montpellier, France
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received
 22 November 2012
Accepted
 after revision 15 January 2013
Available
 online 13 March 2013
Presented
 by Philippe Taquet
Keywords:
Sedimentary
 unconformity
Stephanian
Basal
 Autunian
Asselian
Coniferophytes
Peltasperms
a b s t r a c t
Re-investigation of the western edge of the Lodève basin allows reassignment of one
sandstone-conglomerate
 formation previously identiﬁed as “terminal Stephanian” to Early
Autunian.
 The existence of two unconformable (Stephanian and Autunian) megasequences,
separated
 by a sedimentary gap, which had been rejected, is thus re-afﬁrmed. The authors
also
 found, less than 20 m above the basal Autunian conglomerate, a macroﬂora with taxa
characteristic
 of the famous Tuilières ﬂora from a site, located in the eastern part of the
basin
 near Lodève, in the Grey Autunian group. This conﬁrms that the new Mont Séné-
gra
 fossiliferous beds belong to the Lower Autunian. Moreover, the taxonomic differences
between
 these plants and those from the underlying coal-bearing Stephanian beds indi-
cate
 an important change in the vegetation between the Stephanian and the Autunian. The
ﬁrst
 Autunian sequences were initially deposited within a distal alluvial fan environment,
which
 developed vertically into a ﬂoodplain, within an active volcanic context.
©
 2013 Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Mots clés :
Discordance
 sédimentaire
Stéphanien
Autunien
 basal
Assélien
Coniférophytes
Peltaspermes
r é s u m é
La ré-investigation de la bordure occidentale du bassin de Lodève a permis d’identiﬁer
une
 formation gréso-conglomératique de la base de l’Autunien à la place du « Stéphanien
terminal
 », précédemment décrit. L’existence de deux mégaséquences, stéphanienne puis
autunienne,
 discordantes et séparées par une lacune sédimentaire, est donc réafﬁrmée. Les
auteurs
 ont aussi découvert, à environ 20 m au-dessus du conglomérat basal de cette forma-
tion
 gréso-conglomératique, une macroﬂore identique à celle du site des Tuilières, localisée
à
 la base de l’Autunien gris, dans la partie orientale du bassin permien de Lodève. Outre
le
 fait que cette macroﬂore conﬁrme, au mont Sénégra, l’appartenance de cette nouvelle
formation
 fossilifère à l’Autunien, ses différents taxa indiquent un changement important
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jean.galtier@cirad.fr (J. Galtier).
1631-0683/$ – see front matter © 2013 Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.crpv.2013.01.003

--- PAGE 2 ---
70 G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
de la végétation par rapport à celle du Stéphanien productif sous-jacent. Les premières
séquences
 autuniennes se sont d’abord déposées dans un environnement de cône allu-
vionnaire
 distal, passant verticalement à celui d’une plaine d’inondation évoluant dans un
contexte
 volcanique actif.
© 2013 Académie des sciences. Publié par Elsevier Masson SAS. Tous droits réservés.
1. Introduction
Research in the Lodève Permian basin has been made
possible by many natural outcrops and opencast ura-
nium mines of Compagnie générale des matières nucléaires
(COGEMA). This resulted in the establishment of a con-
tinuous stratigraphic framework for the Lodève basin
(Laversanne, 1976; Odin, 1986) and has allowed signiﬁcant
discoveries in many ﬁelds, such as paleobotany (Galtier
and Broutin, 1995, 2008), paleoichnology (Gand, 1987;
Gand et al., 2000, 2008), paleoentomology (Béthoux, 2003),
invertebrates (Gand et al., 1997a, b, 2008; Garric, 2000),
vertebrates (Falconnet, 2006, 2010; Werneburg et al., 2007)
and volcanism (Nmila, 1995). As a result, the Lodève basin
was recently selected as a reference for studies of climate
development of the continental Permian (e.g., Pochat and
Van den Driessche, 2011; Schneider et al., 2006). However,
the western area of the Lodève basin remains unstudied,
with the exception of the work of Garric (2004, 2007, 2008).
On the western side of Mont Sénégra, at the limit of
the Graissessac Carboniferous and Lodève Permian basins
(Fig. 1A, B), nine coal seams, referred to as the “Orb group”,
are exposed. However, only coal seams numbered 3 to 7
were worked by the coal-mine company (HBCM: Houillères
des Bassins du Centre-Midi) in a very large opencast mine
(Fig. 1D and 4A–C). These coal seams alternate with sand-
stone and siltstone layers, which contain abundant and
well-preserved ﬂoras (Martin-Closas and Galtier, 2005).
They belong to a Stephanian unit, dipping towards the SSE,
dated as Upper Pennsylvanian (= Gzhelian) on the basis of
its paleoﬂoral content. Towards the south of Mont Séné-
gra, these coal-bearing strata are uncomformably overlain
by a grey conglomeratic-sandstone formation, about 50 m
thick, which belongs to the Autunian (Figs. 1D and 2B)
(Anonymous, 1988; Debriette and Gand, 1990; Garric,
2004). This geological formation was also identiﬁed more
formerly towards the southwest, from Lunas to Le Bouché
(Fig. 2B) by the geologists making the “Bédarieux” map
(Bogdanoff et al., 1984) and in several drillings by the
Commissariat à l’énergie atomique (CEA) then by COGEMA
(Jousseaume, 1969; Saint-Martin, 1993).
However, in the Mont Sénégra area, the stratigraphic
attribution to the Autunian of the formation above the
unconformity was changed to Stephanian by Becq-
Giraudon and Van den Driessche (1993), who mentioned
the presence, under the Autunian formation, of “une
série gréso-silteuse du Stéphanien terminal” overlain
in conformity by the “Grès de la base de l’Autunien à
ciment carbonaté et à clastes de dolomies cambriennes”.
Recent study of the Mont Sénégra outcrops by the authors
(Garric, 2004, and present work) did not allow us to dis-
tinguish this “Stéphanien terminal”. Instead, we observed
aggradational detrital formation of which the lower part
consists of plurimetric conglomerates, such as mass- and
debris-ﬂows,
 alternating with sandstones and siltstones.
It is near the top, within ﬁne grained siltstones, that
we found a new macroﬂora. In the present paper, we
provide the stratigraphical context of these fossiliferous
levels, the description of the ﬂora, and a discussion of the
stratigraphical and paleoenvironnemental implications of
these other ﬁndings.
2.
 Description and stratigraphic location of the
levels F1-F3 with macroﬂora
2.1. Description
A ﬁrst level of grey to greenish siltstones forming a wavy
surface with centimeter-scale symmetrical ripple-marks,
rich in carbon and plant debris, was ﬁrst discovered near
the 572-m altitude location (F1, Fig. 1C). A few meters from
this place, a new search conducted in the overlying 50 cm
thick sandstone, allowed us to ﬁnd other plants on the
surface of some sandstone-siltstone beds with a thickness
ranging from 1 to 8 cm (F2, Figs. 1C and 2G). Examination of
thin sections shows that these layers consist of millimeter-
to centimeter-thick sequences, each starting with a bed
of quartz often very angular, immediately topped by a
clay-siltstone drape containing fusinized plant remains
(Figs. 2I, J and 3A); the cement is more or less dolomitic; this
last mineral forms thin layers in some sequences. During
the excavation, the rather high whiteness of some siltstone
levels suggested the presence of volcanic ash. However, a
search for indicators (bubbles, glass) from three samples
was negative (Teboul, 2010). Recently, another level with
plants (F3, Fig. 1C and 2H) has been observed from grey
and dolomitic siltstones located about 10 m from the F2
site.
2.2. Stratigraphic location of plant levels F1–F3 in the
formation overlying the Stephanian (coal-bearing “Orb
group”)
A section of the lower part of this formation was studied
from its contact with the Stephanian deposits, which is vis-
ible on the slope of the former coal mining trail (A7, Fig. 1C,
D). Although heavily fragmented up to point B (Fig. 1C), we
have distinguished ﬁve positive sequences, from the base
to the top.
The ﬁrst sequence (1, Fig. 2D) is 5- to 6 m thick
and begins with several meters of coarsely deposited
conglomerate-sandstones. One of them is surmounted
by a thin (less than 10 cm thick) lenticular bed of
sand/siltstones. In the conglomeratic portion, the breccias
contain abundant pebbles. These consist mostly of angular
quartz mixed with pebbles of blavierite, migmatites and
grey–black sandstones, the latter originating from the

--- PAGE 3 ---
G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79 71
Fig. 1. A, B. Graissessac Carboniferous and Lodève Permian basins. C. Location of F1–F3 levels with Autunian macroﬂora; A7-B-A6: location of the log section
drawn
 in Fig. 2D. D. Detail of the zone of contact between Stephanian and Autunian (stippled) in the Mont-Sénégra area; G1–G4: trails used in open pit
during
 the coal working; 3–8: coal seams of the Orb Group; A1, A2, A4, A7: Stephanian–Autunian contacts still visible; A5–A6: Autunian outcrops; dense
stippling:
 sandstones and mass/debris-ﬂow, of Early Autunian clearly visible.
Fig.
 1. A, B. Les bassins carbonifère de Graissessac et permien de Lodève. C. Localisation des niveaux F1–F3 à macroﬂore autunienne ; A7-B-A6 : situation
du
 log D de la Fig. 2. D. Zone de contact entre le Stéphanien et l’Autunien dans le secteur du mont Sénégra ; G1-G4 : gradins/banquettes d’exploitation
de
 la houille ; 3–7 : couches de charbon du faisceau de l’Orb ; A1, A2, A4, A7 : contacts Stéphanien-Autunien visibles ; A5–A6 : afﬂeurements d’Autunien ;
pointillés
 serrés : grès et mass/débris-ﬂow de l’Autunien inférieur.
Stephanian. Angular cavities also mark the location of dis-
solved dolomitic breccias that were inherited from the local
Cambrian basement. This basal conglomeratic part, charac-
teristic of detrital material (mass debris-ﬂows) transported
over a short distance, was also mentioned by Garric (2004),
northwards in the slope of trails G1 and G2 (Fig. 1D), over-
lying with unconformity the coal-productive Stephanian.
Along trail G1, these conglomerates are also found between
A1 and A2 (Fig. 4C), and continuously contact (Fig. 4D) the
Stephanian basement with an unconformity of 40◦ (Fig. 4E,
F). The contact boundary between this coarse formation
and the underlying Stephanian is very irregular. Along the
former coal mining track, from A7 to B (Fig. 1C), this detrital
sequence No. 1 ends with an ochre siltstone layer, 1 m thick,
very fractured and in which the sequential organization is
difﬁcult
 to interpret. This sequence No. 1 is also observable
in the trail G2 at point A3 (Fig. 1D), where it has the same
thickness but is much better preserved, and where it was
also described by Garric (2004). In this place, at the base of
the “siltite grise à rubans ocre” a volcanic-ash (“cinerite”)
level was identiﬁed by Teboul (2010, sample 28).
Sequences No. 2 and 3 (Fig. 2D) can be followed up
to point B (Fig. 1C). Sequence 2 begins with a con-
glomeratic bed showing cavernous brecciated parts (B,
Fig. 2D) without apparent layering, and with polygenic,
rounded to angular pebbles of the same type as those
in the lower sequence, but with more dolomitic blocks
up to 10 cm in diameter. All these clasts are distributed
within a sandstone-dolomitic matrix. This conglomerate is
topped by a thick sand-siltstone-dolomitic bed including

--- PAGE 4 ---
72 G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
Fig. 2. A. Permian synthetic 1og of the Lodève basin eastern part (Fo: Formations; Ens: Ensembles; V. A.: volcanic-ashes; En: palaeoenvironments).
B.
 Geological map of the Lodève basin western part (after Garric, 2012), F1–F3: Autunian formations; F4–F5: Saxonian formations. C. Log of the LNS2
boring,
 volcanic-ashes are in roman ﬁgures, “bituminous shales” are in Arabic ﬁgures. D. Section of the Early Autunian between A7 and A6, detailed in
Fig.
 1C (1–5: macroscopic sequences; St: Stephanian; C: conglomerates, debris/mass-ﬂows, FS–Si: ﬁne-grained sandstones/siltstones; B: Breccias with
dolomitic
 elements; S/Si: sand/siltstones; Va: volcanic-ash Ldci18; F1–F3 siltstones levels with Autunian macroﬂora). E. Sketch of the Early Autunian for-
mation
 from the GRS31bis boring; 1–3: sequences numbering. F. A6 outcrop showing the sequences Nos. 4 and 5 of Fig. 2D; B enlarged on the right side:
dolomitic
 breccias of sequence No. 4. G. Layers with plants of the site F2. H. Fossiliferous site F3. I, J. Microscopic thin sections of fossiliferous sequences
from
 site F2; detailed description in text.
Fig.
 2. A. Log synthétique de la série permienne de la partie orientale du bassin de Lodève (Fo : formations ; Ens : Ensembles ; V. A : cinérites ; En : environ-
nements).
 B. Carte géologique de la partie occidentale du bassin de Lodève (d’après Garric, 2012), F1–F3 : formations de l’Autunien ; F4–F5 : formations du
Saxonien.
 C. Log du sondage LNS2, cinérites en chiffres romains, couches bitumineuses en chiffes arabes. D. Log de l’Autunien basal entre les points A7 et
A6
 de la Fig. 1C (1–5 : séquences macroscopiques ; St : Stéphanien ; C : conglomérats, débris/mass-ﬂows, FS–Si : grès ﬁns/siltites ; B : brèches à éléments
dolomitiques
 ; S/Si : grès/siltites ; Va : cinérite Ldci18 ; F1–F3 : niveaux de siltites à macroﬂore autunienne). E. Base de la formation autunienne dans le
sondage
 GRS31bis ; 1–3 : séquences. F. Afﬂeurement A6 (séquences 4 et 5 de la Fig. 2D) ; encart, à droite : agrandissement de la zone conglomératique et
bréchique
 dolomitique B (séquence 4). G. Niveaux à macroﬂore du site F2. H. Niveaux fossilifères F3. I, J. Lames minces de séquences du site F2 ; lits de
quartz
 anguleux alternant avec des siltites à ciment dolomitique ; abondance de débris végétaux charbonneux en noir ; fusain probable.

--- PAGE 5 ---
G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79 73
centimetric microconglomeratic layers with dolomite and
quartz intraclasts. Sequence No. 3 has the same characters
as No. 2.
After a small gap, sequences No. 4 and 5 are visible in
the slope of the trail G4 (A6, Figs. 1C, D and 2F). They are
petrographically similar to the previous ones; nevertheless,
in the lower part of No. 4, dolomitic breccia zones seem to
be more frequent (Fig. 2D). The sandstone matrix shows
abundant dolomite, quartz pebbles and volcanic-ash rock
debris.
Discontinuous
 and fractured outcrops between the
A6 exposure and those beds containing the Autunian
macroﬂora (F1–F3, Figs. 1C, D and 2D) did not allow us to
locate fossiliferous beds quite precisely in sequence No. 5,
which is approximately 3.5 m thick. Considering the dip of
the beds, we suggest that the succession of plant-bearing
layers – from F1 to F3 – is about 2 m in thickness up to near
the top of sequence No. 5. Actually, the top of this is not fully
visible due to vegetation cover and is partially covered by
colluvial deposits. The volcanic-ash Ldci 18 (Fig. 2D, Va),
identiﬁed by Garric (2004) below layer F1, was conﬁrmed
by Teboul (2010). It contains desiccation cracks, traces of
roots and dolomitized seeds.
3. The macroﬂora of the sites F1–F3
The fossil plants are very fragmentary, none exceeding
a few centimeters in length. In some levels, they even occur
as accumulations of millimetric-sized pieces (Fig. 3A). It
is noteworthy that, in this case, many fragments are of
a bright black color, suggesting that they are burnt frag-
ments of plants or fusain. This is supported by the fact
that thin sections of these plants seen under reﬂected light
are opaque (Fig. 2I, J). However, we did not succeed in
isolating these fragments using acid maceration. Despite
the unpromising facies, several attempts to extract paly-
nomorphs have been carried out in different laboratories,
but all have been unsuccessful. Fossil plants mainly occur
in layers of ochreous color. Slightly larger plant fragments
are found at the boundary of apparently grey beds of angu-
lar quartz. But the largest fragments have been found in
relatively soft grey siltites; it is only in these softer rocks
(Fig. 3B) where it was possible to use the “dégagement”
technique to expose the plant fragments.
The identiﬁed plant assemblage consists of a small num-
ber of taxa, all belonging to seed plants:
• ﬁrstly we recognized leafy twigs of coniferophytes in
the form of dispersed ultimate branches; due to their
small size, they are attributed with some reservations
to Culmitzschia frondosa (Fig. 3B), Hermitia schlotheimii
(Fig. 3B, C) and Walchia piniformis (Fig. 3D). In addition,
dwarf shoot scales similar to those of W. piniformis cones
(Fig. 3J) and numerous dispersed ovules have been found,
including Cordaicarpus sp. (Fig. 3I);
• less
 common are representatives of peltaspermous pteri-
dosperms with characteristic frond fragments (Fig. 3A,
G, F) and fertile parts attributed to Peltaspermum sp.
(Fig. 3H). The specimen illustrated in Fig. 3 F is an ulti-
mate pinna with a distinct rachis (more than 1 mm broad)
bearing dissected sphenopteroid pinnules (5 mm long)
as
 well as small round intercalary lobes between the
pinnules (white arrow, Fig. 3F). This specimen is sim-
ilar to Gracilopteris bergeronii; however, if intercalary
pinnules are present on the penultimate rachis, such
intercalary lobes borne on the ultimate rachis have not
been mentioned in this species (Doubinger, 1956; Kerp
and Haubold, 1988). Alternatively, this specimen could be
attributed to Arnhardtia mouretii, which possesses longer,
but similar, pinnules and intercalary lobes on the ulti-
mate pinna rachis (Zeiller, 1898). The pinna illustrated at
the same magniﬁcation in Fig. 3G is either a large pin-
nately compound pinnule or, more probably, an ultimate
pinna with a narrow rachis bearing small three-lobed
pinnules; it is tentatively attributed to Rhachiphyllum dia-
bolica or to R. lyratifolia. The same taxonomic identity is
proposed for the poorly preserved pinna with lobed pin-
nules illustrated in Fig. 3A (arrow);
• at last, one leaf fragment of the possible cycad Tae-
niopteris is shown in Fig. 3E.
4. Stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental results
4.1. Stratigraphic attribution of F1–F3 levels with
macroﬂora to Autunian
4.1.1. Paleontological data
The list of the macroﬂora results from a prelim-
inary investigation. Though quantitatively small, it is
nonetheless signiﬁcant that the ﬂora contains no element
recognized in the underlying Stephanian coal-bearing lev-
els (Martin-Closas and Galtier, 2005). Actually, all identiﬁed
taxa of the new ﬂora have been described historically
(Doubinger, 1956; Florin, 1938–1944; Grand’Eury, 1877;
Zeiller, 1898) from the Tuilières fossiliferous site near
Lodève, which contains the most diverse ﬂora known in
Europe for the Early Autunian. This site is located in the
eastern part of the Lodève basin and corresponds to the
stratigraphic interval between “beds 45 and 48” of the
Lodève basin stratigraphic column (Fig. 2A), i.e. to the basal
Usclas–Saint-Privat Formation.
Among the taxa identiﬁed in the new ﬂora of Mont Séné-
gra, only two (W. piniformis and Taeniopteris sp.) have a
relatively broad stratigraphic distribution, from the Late
Stephanian–Gzhelian (of many Euramerican basins) to the
Autunian/Lower Rotliegend (e.g. Lodève, Autun, Thuringia,
Saar-Nahe basins) correlated with Asselian to Sakmarian
times (Schneider et al., 2006). In contrast, the other taxa
(C. frondosa, R. lyratifolia, G. bergeronii) are restricted to the
Lodève, Autun, and Saar-Nahe basins (Broutin et al., 1999;
Kerp and Fichter, 1985). Moreover, some taxa (A. mouretii,
H. schlotheimii) are only known from the Tuilières local-
ity. This supports the idea that on the western border of
the Lodève basin, in the area of Mont Sénégra, the base
of the sandstone conglomeratic formation containing the
new ﬂora must be correlated with the basal Usclas–Saint-
Privat Formation of the Lodève basin and considered as
Early Autunian. This stratigraphic attribution conﬁrms the
one previously based on paleoichnofauna by Debriette
and Gand (1990) for similar levels located near Mont
Sénégra.

--- PAGE 6 ---
74 G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
Fig. 3. A. Siltstone surface showing abundant very small plant fragments including fusainized material (bright black) and Rhachiphyllum lyratifolia pinna
(arrow),
 SEN19. B. Leafy twigs of Culmitzschia frondosa (1) and Hermitia schlotheimii (2) SEN14. C. Hermitia schlotheimii, SEN20. D. Walchia piniformis, SEN09.
E.
 Taeniopteris sp., leaf fragment, SEN15. F. Gracilopteris bergeronii or Arnhardtia mouretii pinna, SEN 01. G. Rhachiphyllum diabolica or R. lyratifolia ultimate
pinna,
 SEN15 (same magniﬁcation as F). H. Peltaspermum sp., SEN12. I. Cordaicarpus sp. dispersed ovule, SEN 02. J. Dispersed dwarf shoot of W. piniformis
cone,
 SEN12. Palaeobotanical collections, Montpellier-2 University. Scale = 1 cm, except I and J, same scale = 5 mm.
Fig.
 3. A. Surface d’une siltite montrant de nombreux petits fragments de plantes dont certains (noir brillant) transformés en fusain et penne de Rhachiphyl-
lum
 lyratifolia (ﬂèche), SEN19. B. Rameaux feuillés de Culmitzschia frondosa (1) et Hermitia schlotheimii (2) SEN14. C. Hermitia schlotheimii, SEN20. D. Walchia
piniformis,
 SEN09. E. Taeniopteris sp., fragment de feuille, SEN15. F. Penne de Gracilopteris bergeronii ou d’Arnhardtia mouretii, SEN 01. G. Rhachiphyllum
diabolica ou R. lyratifolia, penne ultime, SEN15. H. Peltaspermum sp., SEN12. I. Cordaicarpus sp., ovule dispersé, SEN 02. J. Écaille ovulifère dispersée du cône
de
 W. piniformis, SEN12. Collections paléobotaniques de l’université Montpellier-2. Barre d’échelle = 1 cm, excepté pour I et J, dont l’échelle = 5 mm.

--- PAGE 7 ---
G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79 75
Fig. 4. A. Present view of the Stephanian and Autunian formations on the west slope of Mont Sénégra. B. Geological interpretation of Fig. A; Autunian:
stippled,
 and dash line: contact; f: possible fault; G1–G4: former mine trails; 1–9: coal seams numbers (see also Fig. 1D). C. Enlargement of ﬁg. A between
coal
 seams No. 3 to No. 6; St: Stephanian; Aut.: Early Autunian: mass/debris-ﬂows, sand/siltstones formation overlying in unconformity the Stephanian;
A1,
 A2: places showing clearly the Stephanian/Autunian contact. D–F. Detail of Stephanian–Autunian contact zones observed between A1 and A2. D,
E.
 Normal but discordant contact between the Stephanian sandstones (St.) and the Autunian (Aut.), the latter consists of mass/debris-ﬂows (DF) made
of
 angular/weathered blocks/pebbles of dolomite, quartz, quartzite, blavierite, Stephanian sand/siltstones spread into sandstone-dolomitic matrix (A1
location
 ** in Fig. 4C). D. Enlargement of the contact zone. E. General view of the same with dolomitic breccia zones (B) in mass/debris-ﬂows; D white bars:
deepening.
 F. Autunian/Stephanian contact on a lystric fault in A2 (*location in Fig. 4C); the Autunian conglomeratic formation slid on coal-seam 6.
Fig.
 4. A. Vue actuelle du Stéphanien et de l’Autunien sur la pente ouest du mont Sénégra. B. Interprétation géologique de A, l’Autunien est ﬁguré en
pointillés
 ; mêmes abréviations que pour la Fig. 1D ; f : contact masqué, possible faille. C. Agrandissement de la zone A1-A2 ; faisceau stéphanien (St) de
l’Orb
 (couches 3 à 6), recouvert par l’Autunien (Aut.). D–F. Détails des zones du contact Stéphanien-Autunien, observées entre A1 et A2. D, E. Contact normal
mais
 discordant entre le Stéphanien gréseux (St.) et l’Autunien constitué de brèches (B) et de débris-ﬂows (DF) à galets/blocs anguleux/usés, de dolomie,
quartz,
 quartzite, blaviérite, grès/siltites stéphaniens, matrice gréso-dolomitique, vus entre A1 et A2 (** sur la Fig. 4C). D. Agrandissement d’une zone de
contact.
 E. Vue plus large de la même zone avec les brèches (B) ; barre blanche D : litage. F. Contact Stéphanien/Autunien sur une faille lystrique en A2 (*
sur
 Fig. 4C) ; la formation conglomératique autunienne a glissé sur la couche de charbon n◦ 6.

--- PAGE 8 ---
76 G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
4.1.2. Corings and ﬁeld geological data
The base of the Autunian megasequence consists of
conglomeratic layers in sharp unconformity above the
Stephanian. This was regularly observed in drill cores car-
ried out in the Autunian of the western part of the Lodève
basin for the research of uranium as summarized by Saint-
Martin (1993).
One of these corings (GRS 31bis), located to the south-
west of Mont Sénégra (Fig. 2B), went through 691 m of
rocks from the surface, across the Autunian, and into the
Stephanian. In order to facilitate the comparison with our
outcropping section of Mont Sénégra (between A7 and A6:
Fig. 1D and illustration in Fig. 2D), we have reproduced
at the same scale in Fig. 2E the ﬁrst 20 m of the Autu-
nian Formation as exposed in the drill core. Lying with
an unconformity of 10◦ on the Stephanian coal siltstones,
the basal Autunian is represented by 8 m of mass/debris-
ﬂows. They consist of a reddish sandstone and carbonate
matrix including altered angular and rounded granite peb-
bles up to 20 cm in diameter, as well as Stephanian debris,
up to 5 cm long, as well as quartz. These data (Anonymous,
COGEMA 1988–1989) were supplemented by Saint-Martin
(1993), who produced a detailed study, including petro-
graphic, sedimentological, and tectonic information.
Above the basal conglomeratic beds, sequence No. 1
(Fig. 2, E1) consists of alternating coarse sandstones and
siltstones. It is overlain by sequences No. 2 and 3 of the
same type, but that are less conglomeratic and coarse
(Fig. 2E2–3). Such a vertical change was also noted in the
A7–A6 section of Mont Sénégra (Fig. 2D).
From the top of the conglomeratic part of sequence No. 1
(level 117 m of the GRS 31bis core), Saint-Martin (1993)
attributes the overlying beds (ranging from level 117 to
36 m) to the “Grey Autunian Formation”. In the synthetic
log of the Permian established by COGEMA for the east-
ern part of the Lodève basin (Fig. 2A; Gand, 1994; Gand
et al., 1997b), this “Grey Formation” represents the section
extending between the basal conglomerate and bed No. 16.
Saint-Martin (1993) attributed the uppermost part of
the cored section to the “Grey and Red Autunian” ending
at “mark 00” in the lithostratigraphic log in Fig. 2A. Based
on the nomenclature of Odin (1986), the “Usclas–Saint-
Privat (F1)” and “Tuilières-Loiras (F2)” Formations were
included in the GRS 31bis core. This interpretation implies
that the sequential organization of the Autunian series in
the western part of the Lodève basin is similar to that of
the eastern part. Similar sequential organization was also
found in cores LNS1 and LNS2 (Fig. 2B) made in the Lunas
area. The Jousseaume report (1969) indicates that the LNS1
coring reached the basal Cambrian after coming through a
large part of the Grey and Red Autunian and then the whole
Grey Autunian, beginning with its basal conglomerate. The
volcanic-ashes/cinerites IX and X were for the ﬁrst time
discovered here, in the eastern part of the basin. The LNS2
core (Fig. 2B, C) is more complete; it probably came through
the beds No. 5 to 30 and cinerites V to X. In the Lunas area,
some of these volcanic markers were also observed in out-
crops by Garric (2008). In addition, based on the general
eastward dip of the Autunian series and on the geographic
location of cinerites V and X (about 1 km west of the Mont
Sénégra), one can suggest that the Autunian levels, with
the
 macroﬂora described here, are underlying cinerite X.
Therefore, they should be contemporary with those of the
“Tuilières” site, which have provided a very diverse Autu-
nian macroﬂora. As stated above, the levels containing the
ﬂora also overlie fanglomerates with volcanic-ash layers
that are currently impossible to correlate with those in the
eastern part of the Lodève basin. But, on this western bor-
der, Garric (2007) also identiﬁed similar volcanic rocks in
the base of the Lower Autunian, along the D23 road, 250 m
west of Le Bouché (Fig. 2B). Considering their metric thick-
ness, this author believes that they are comparable to the
cinerite markers XXIV to XII (Fig. 2A).
4.2. Age of the Stephanian and overlying Autunian
formation with macroﬂoras near Mont Sénégra
The ﬂora found in the Stephanian of Mont Sénégra,
between coal layers No. 3 to 7, has the same character-
istics as the ﬂora of the Upper Stephanian (Stephanian
B + C = “Forézien”) described in the Saint-Étienne coal basin
and proposed as a reference in France by Doubinger et al.
(1995). In Mont Sénégra, this Stephanian ﬂora has been
dated as Upper Pennsylvanian (Martin-Closas and Galtier,
2005) and can be more precisely attributed to a Gzhelian
age, as suggested by Doubinger et al. (1995: 305) for the
French Late Stephanian. The same age would be extended
to the Latest Carboniferous deposits found at Mont Sénégra
above the coal layers 3 to 7 (Fig. 4A, B) towards the South
of the Graissessac Carboniferous basin.
Importantly, in this same place, Brugier et al. (2003)
have dated as 295.5 ± 5.1 Ma (using the zircon 206Pb/238U
method) several samples of a bentonite located between
coal seams 4a and 4b. This gives these coal seams an
Asselian age (i.e. Early Permian), date based on the
recent International Chronostratigraphic Chart of IUGS
(Cohen et al., 2012), which provides a numerical age of
298,9 ± 0.2 Ma for the Gzhelian/Asselian limit (or Carbonif-
erous/Permian boundary) and of 295.5 ± 0.4 Ma for the top
of the Asselian.
Schneider et al. (2006: 172) attributed the whole coal-
bearing sequence of Graissessac to the Stephanian C;
however, taking into account geochronological results of
Brugier et al. (2003), they dated the major coal seams at
299 Ma (i.e. on the Carboniferous/Permian limit on their
chart) and consider the top of the sequence (and accord-
ingly the top of Stephanian C) as Early Asselian. This is
in disagreement with the usage of Carboniferous chronos-
tratigraphy (Heckel and Clayton, 2006), which includes the
whole Stephanian within the Carboniferous and the top of
the Stephanian as equivalent to the Gzhelian.
In the Sénégra opencast mine, above coal seam 7, there
is a thick sequence of detrital deposits in which coal beds
are rare, thin and not worked (e.g., 8 and 9, Fig. 4A, B). From
5 m above coal seam 7, plant remains become rare and sev-
eral conglomeratic lenses with small quartz pebbles are
visible. This would correspond to the top of the Stepha-
nian C sensu Schneider et al. (2006) and perhaps, partly, to
what was interpreted as “Terminal Stephanian” by Becq-
Giraudon and Van den Driessche (1993). These authors
studying the exposures of the Mont Sénégra opencast mine
suggested a continuity of the sedimentation between the

--- PAGE 9 ---
G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79 77
Stephanian and the Permian. They described, as Termi-
nal Stephanian (2 in their Fig. 2b), a sand-siltstone series
extending northwards, within a very clear unconformity,
on the coal seams No. 4–7 (see Fig. 4F for coal-seam 6).
However they have drawn it overlain in conformity by the
basal Autunian sandstones (3 in their Fig. 2b) with carbon-
ate cement and Cambrian dolomite clasts. Actually neither
Garric (2004) nor the authors of this paper recognized this
sandstone-siltstone terminal horizon of the Stephanian. In
its place, and particularly well exposed between A1 and
A2 (Figs. 1D and 4A–C), this horizon corresponds to a con-
glomerate of mass/debris-ﬂows with a carbonate matrix
and breccias showing dolomitic angular elements, which
are often dissolved (Fig. 4(?) D, E). These are characters that
are precisely those of the Autunian conglomerate deﬁned
in Becq-Giraudon and Van den Driessche (1993: 942).
To summarize, as Saint-Martin (1993) and Garric (2007)
have successively pointed out from petrographic, sedimen-
tological and tectonic data, conﬁrmed by the GRS 31bis
coring and observed to the south, in the Aire Raymond
and Le Bouché areas, the two sedimentary megacycles
Stephanian and Autunian are truly separated by a signif-
icant discordance that corresponds to a major tectonic
phase. The rubefaction of the Uppermost Stephanian lay-
ers, the presence within basal Autunian conglomerates of
pebbles of Stephanian origin and of others with dolomite,
quartz, quartzite, blavierite and granite from the regional
basement, all indicate the emersion and erosion of the
Stephanian basin and its borders. The second Autunian
cycle then took place eastwards within a new extensive
basin (Saint-Martin, 1992, 1993). Based on paleontologi-
cal correlations between various European Permian basins,
Schneider et al. (2006, Fig. 9) proposed the beginning of this
Autunian cycle in Lodève at the very end of the Asselian,
after a long gap (about 6 Ma). However, the Asselian
duration being reduced to 3.4 Ma (Cohen et al., 2012), it
seems likely that the sedimentary gap has been shorter in
time.
5. Paleoenvironments and climate
5.1. During the mass/debris-ﬂow deposits of Mont
Sénégra
The ﬁrst Autunian conglomeratic layers of Mont Séné-
gra are mass/debris-ﬂows of alluvial fanglomerates. As the
result of weathering, these were deposited at the foot of
elevated areas along a fault scarp in a subsiding basin of
tectonic origin. Such a mechanism still underway in semi-
arid regions (Friedman and Sanders, 1978) was illustrated
for the western part of the Lodève basin by Garric (2007).
As for the Stephanian deposits, the active area was always
located on the southern border of the basin. However,
the presence of pebbles of Stephanian sandstones, gran-
ite, blavierite and dolomite suggest that detrital sediments
also come from the western and northern borders, espe-
cially of the Mendic area. The size of pebbles, not more than
10 cm long, suggests that the deposits were carried out in
the distal part of an alluvial fan at the edge of the ﬂood
plain.
5.2.
 Conditions during deposition of plant-bearing
siltstones
Overall, these fossiliferous rocks are constituted of
regular, thin sequences with horizontal bedding. This orga-
nization, as well as the millimeter-sized plant fragments
observed in the inter-beds, but also in the clay-siltstone
and the dolomitic matrix, suggests that sediment and
plant debris were deposited in a rather low-energy ﬂood
plain environment. Centimeter-scale wave lengths of sym-
metric ripple-marks, as well as rare oblique lamination
also demonstrate its shallowness and a moderate hydro-
dynamism, the latter being shown by the fossil plants,
which are not deformed. Desiccation cracks observed in
some volcanic-ash layers with traces of roots suggest
plant colonization of periodically exposed surfaces, close or
within the sedimentary areas. The Autunian plants, mainly
conifers and peltasperms, are considered to be mesophytic
to xerophytic. They constitute evidence of a clear change
in environment and climate compared to earlier Stepha-
nian vegetation, which was dominated by a quite different
ﬂora composed of mesophytic to hygrophytic sigillarians,
calamiteans, ferns and pteridosperms (Martin-Closas and
Galtier, 2005).
5.3. Floral change and climate
Similar ﬂoristic changes occur in other areas in the
world, subject to well-known trends towards “drying”
at the Pennsylvanian/Permian boundary. Representatives
of conifers and peltasperms appear sporadically, dur-
ing the Late Pennsylvanian, in tropical basinal lowlands
where they become dominant during the Permian. This
has been documented in detail, both in Europe and
North America (e.g., Broutin et al., 1990; DiMichele
and Aronson, 1992; Kerp and Fichter, 1985). Inversely,
taxa from Carboniferous-type wetland biome, such as
calamiteans, re-appear later (= “recurrence” of Broutin
et al., 1990) in landscapes dominated by conifers and
they are interpreted as stream and lake-side elements
(DiMichele et al., 2006). Such occurrence of calamiteans in
a plant assemblage dominated by conifers and peltasperms
has been actually reported from younger Early Permian
deposits of the same Lodève basin (Galtier and Broutin,
1995). Recently, DiMichele et al. (2008) proposed that
the Pennsylvanian/Asselian vegetational change is not an
evolutionary one, but reﬂects tracking of climate change,
with the conifer–peltasperm ﬂora tolerant to seasonal
drought replacing a ﬂora with low drought tolerance.
Therefore ﬂoral change reﬂects climate, but climate is
highly geographically heterogeneous and can confound
terrestrial plant biostratigraphy. We agree with this inter-
pretation, but we consider that the newly described
ﬂora from Mont Sénégra is the ﬁrst appearance, in the
Lodève basin area, of such a conifer–peltasperm ﬂora. In
the present example, we have no evidence that a simi-
lar “dry ﬂora” was already somewhere in the landscape
during the well paleobotanically documented (Martin-
Closas and Galtier, 2005) Pennsylvanian time for this
area.

--- PAGE 10 ---
78 G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79
6. Conclusions
The authors have discovered, in the Mont Sénégra area,
beds rich in fossil plants located about 20 m above the
Stephanian/Autunian contact. From its taxonomic content,
this plant assemblage is identical to the famous ﬂora of the
Tuilières site, near Lodève, which comes from the lower
part (Grey Autunian) of the Permian series and is con-
sidered to be Asselian in age. We suggest that a similar
age should be attributed to the here newly deﬁned, Autu-
nian conglomeratic-sandstone formation of Mont Sénégra.
This formation unconformably overlies the Stephanian
coal-bearing Orb Group. Between the Stephanian and Autu-
nian deposits, we have not found the sandstone-siltstone
series of the Terminal Stephanian, as interpreted by Becq-
Giraudon and Van den Driessche (1993), and we consider
the continuity of sedimentation between Stephanian and
Autunian as unproven. As a result, we conﬁrm the exist-
ence of two unconformable sedimentary megasequences,
one for the Stephanian and one for the Autunian, separated
by a time gap (? a few Ma) during a part of the Asselian. It is
expected that the real duration of this gap will be demon-
strated, in the future, by dating of cinerites occurring locally
in the basal Autunian.
The discovery of plants in the Autunian near Mont
Sénégra including conifers and peltasperms, which are
interpreted as xerophilous to mesophilous plants, is impor-
tant because it reﬂects a sharp change of vegetation
compared to the underlying Stephanian coal group that
is dominated by sigillarians, calamiteans, ferns and pteri-
dosperms, mostly hygrophilous and mesophilous. In the
Mont Sénégra area, as early as Early Permian, vegetation
tolerant of periodic soil moisture deﬁcits had colonized
alluvial fanglomerates and ﬂood plains, on the borders of
a new sedimentary basin. This basin would develop during
the Permian period into an increasingly larger area, moving
progressively eastward relative to the former Carbonifer-
ous basin of Graissessac.
Acknowledgements
We thank J. Broutin, W.A. DiMichele and an anony-
mous reviewer for positive critical comments on this
manuscript.
References
Anonymous., 1988. Étude de stabilité de la découverte d’Alzou (H.B.C.M.-
U.E. Hérault), Rapport CERCHAR 88(1)88-71-1632 sept 1988, 32 p.
Anonymous., 1988–1989 Coupe du sondage GRS31bis. Doc. inédit,
COGEMA, Archives Centrales Mines, Razès, Limousin, 13 p.
Becq-Giraudon, J.F., Van den Driessche, J., 1993. Continuité de la sédi-
mentation entre le Stéphanien et l’Autunien dans le bassin de
Graissessac-Lodève (Sud du Massif Central) implications tectoniques.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. II 317, 939–945.
Béthoux, O., 2003. Évolution des Archaeorthoptera (Insecta : Neoptera)
du Paléozoïque supérieur au Mésozoïque inférieur. Diversité tax-
onomique, disparité morphologique, paléoécologie. Thèse Paléon-
tologie, Muséum d’histoire naturelle de Paris, 2 tomes, 213 p. +
300 p.
Bogdanoff, S., Donnot, M., Ellenberger, F., 1984. Note explicative de la
feuille de Bédarieux à 1/5000. BRGM, Orléans, 105 p.
Broutin, J., Doubinger, J., Farjanel, G., Freytet, P., Kerp, H., Langiaux, J.,
Lebreton, M.L., Sebban, S., Satta, S., 1990. Le renouvellement des
ﬂores au passage Carbonifère-Permien : approches stratigraphique,
biologique,
 sédimentologique. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. II 311,
1563–1569.
Broutin, J., Chateauneuf, J.J., Galtier, J., Ronchi, A., 1999. L’Autunien d’Autun
reste-t-il une référence pour les dépôts continentaux du Permien
inférieur d’Europe ? Apport des données paléobotaniques. Geol. Fr.
2, 17–31.
Brugier, O., Becq-Giraudon, J.F., Champenois, M., Deloule, E., Ludden, J.,
Mangin, D., 2003. Application of in situ zircon geochronology and
accessory phase chemistry to constraining basin development dur-
ing post-collisionnal extension: a case study from the French Massif
Central. Chem. Geol. 201, 319–336.
Cohen, K.M., Finney, S., Gibbard, P.L., 2012. International chronostati-
graphic chart. IUGS-ICS. www.stratigraphy.org
Debriette, P., Gand, G., 1990. Conséquences stratigraphiques et paléoen-
vironnementales de nouvelles observations paléontologiques dans le
Permien de la partie occidentale du bassin de Lodève, Sud du Massif
Central. Geol. Fr. 1, 19–32.
DiMichele, W.A., Aronson, R.B., 1992. The Pennsylvanian–Permian veg-
etational transition: a terrestrial analogue to the onshore-offshore
hypothesis. Evolution 46 (3), 807–824.
DiMichele, W.A., Tabor, N.J., Chaney, D.S., Nelson, W.J., 2006. From
wetlands to wet spots: environmental tracking and the fate of Car-
boniferous
 elements in Early Permian tropical ﬂoras. In: Greb, S.F.,
DiMichele, W.A. (Eds.), Wetlands through time, 399. Geol. Soc. Am.
Spec. Pap., pp. 223–248.
DiMichele, W.A., Kerp, H., Tabor, N.J., Looy, C.V., 2008. The so-called
“Paleophytic-Mesophytic” transition in equatorial Pangea–Multiple
biomes and vegetational tracking of climate change through geologi-
cal time. Palaeogeogr., Palaeoclimatol., Palaeoecol. 268, 152–163.
Doubinger, J., 1956. Contribution à l’étude des ﬂores autuno-
stéphaniennes. Mem. Soc. geol. France N.S. 35, 1–180.
Doubinger, J., Vetter, P., Langiaux, J., Galtier, J., Broutin, J., 1995. La ﬂore
fossile du bassin houiller de Saint-Étienne, 64. Mémoires du Muséum
national d’histoire naturelle, Paris, pp. 1–355.
Falconnet, J., 2006. Redescription d’Aphelosaurus lutevensis Gervais 1859
(Diapsida, Araeoscelidia) du Permien de Lodève. Implications phy-
logénétiques et morpho-fonctionnelles. Mémoire de Master 2, UMR
5143 CNRS, Département Histoire de la Terre, Muséum national
d’histoire naturelle, inédit, 43 p.
Falconnet, J., 2010. Diversiﬁcation initiale des Amniotes : l’apport des
Amniotes franc¸ ais. Thèse, Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, Paris,
340 p.
Florin, R., 1938–1944. Die Koniferen des Oberkarbons und des Unteren
Perms. Palaeontographica B 85 (1-7), 1–654.
Friedman, G.M., Sanders, J.E., 1978. Nonmarine Environments I, II. Princi-
ples of Sedimentology. John Wiley & Sons, New York/Chichester, pp.
199–269.
Galtier, J., Broutin, J., 1995. La ﬂore de la zone de transition de l’Autunien
supérieur de Lodève. Sci. Geol. 48, 83–93.
Galtier, J., Broutin, J., 2008. Floras from red beds of the Permian basin of
Lodève (Southern France). J. Iberian Geol. 34, 57–72.
Gand, G., 1987. Les traces de Vertébrés tétrapodes du Permien franc¸ ais
Paléontologie, Stratigraphie, Paléoenvironnements. Thèse d’État, uni-
versité de Bourgogne. Edit. Centre des Sciences de la Terre, 341 p.
Gand, G., 1994. Ichnocoenoses à Isopodichnus furcosus nov. ichnosp. dans
le Permien du bassin de Lodève, Massif central, France. Geobios 27,
74–86.
Gand, G., Garric, J., Demathieu, G., Ellenberger, P., 2000. La palichnofaune
de vertébrés tétrapodes du Permien supérieur du bassin de Lodève
(Languedoc, France). Palaeovertebrata 29, 1–82.
Gand, G., Garric, J., Lapeyrie, J., 1997a. Biocénoses à Triopsidés (Crustacea,
Branchiopoda) du Permien du bassin de Lodève (France). Geobios 30,
673–700.
Gand, G., Lapeyrie, J., Garric, J., Nel, A., Schneider, J., Walter, H., 1997b.
Découverte d’Arthropodes et de Bivalves inédits dans le Permien con-
tinental (Lodèvois, France). C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. IIa 325, 891–898.
Gand, G., Garric, J., Schneider, J., Walter, H., Lapeyrie, J., Martin, J., Thiery,
A., 2008. Notostraca trackways in Permian playa environments of the
Lodève basin (France). J. Iberian Geol. 34, 73–108.
Garric, J., 2000. Les rigoles fossilifères du Saxonien du bassin de Lodève
(Languedoc, France). Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Autun 174, 7–48.
Garric, J., 2004. Le passage du Stéphanien à l’Autunien dans la découverte
des houillères (HBCM) du mont Sénégra, à la limite du bassin car-
bonifère de Graissessac et du bassin permien de Lodève (Hérault). Bull.
Soc. Hist. Nat. Autun 192, 29–40.
Garric, J., 2007. Le passage du Stéphanien à l’Autunien au nord-ouest de
La Tour-Sur-Orb, à la limite du bassin de Graissessac et du bassin
permien de Lodève (Hérault-France). Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Autun 194,
29–51.

--- PAGE 11 ---
G. Gand et al. / C. R. Palevol 12 (2013) 69–79 79
Garric, J., 2008. Étude stratigraphique et tectonique de la partie
nord de la bordure occidentale du bassin permien de Lodève,
secteur de Lunas (Hérault-France). Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Autun 197,
31–44.
Garric, G., 2012. Données géologiques nouvelles sur la partie occidentale
du Bassin Permien de Lodève (Hérault France) - première partie. Bull.
Soc. Hist. Nat. Autun. 203, 25–40.
Grand’Eury, C., 1877. Flore carbonifère du département de la Loire. Mem.
Acad. Sci. Paris 24, 1–624.
Heckel, P.H., Clayton, G., 2006. The Carboniferous system. Use of the new
ofﬁcial names for the subsystems, series and stages. Geologica Acta 4
(3), 403–407.
Jousseaume, J., 1969. Campagne de sondages géologiques de Lunas. HER
No. E 10 bis joint aux rapports 69.2 et 69. 3. Doc. du CEA inédits,
Archives de la COGEMA, Razès, Limousin.
Kerp, J.H.F., Fichter, J., 1985. Die Makroﬂoren des saarpfälzis-
chen Rotliegenden (?Ober-Karbon-Unter-Perm; SW-Deutschland).
Mainzer Geowiss. Mitt. 14, 159–286.
Kerp, J.H.F., Haubold, H., 1988. Aspects of Permian palaeobotany and paly-
nology. VIII. On the reclassiﬁcation of the west- and central European
species of the form-genus Callipteris Brongniart 1849. Rev. Palaeobot.
Palynol. 54, 135–150.
Laversanne,
 J., 1976. Sédimentation et minéralisation du Permien de
Lodève Hérault. Thèse 3e cycle, université de Paris Sud-Orsay,
300 p.
Martin-Closas, C., Galtier, J., 2005. Plant Taphonomy and Paleoe-
cology of Late Pennsylvanian Intramontane Wetlands in the
Graissessac–Lodève Basin (Languedoc, France). Palaios 20, 249–265.
Nmila, A., 1995. L’empreinte du volcanisme dans le remplissage per-
mien du bassin de Lodève. Étude pétrographique et géochimique.
Implication
 métallogénique. Thèse d’État, université Pierre-et-Marie-
Curie, Paris-6, 202 p.
Odin, B., 1986. Les formations permiennes, Autunien supérieur à
Thuringien, du « bassin » de Lodève, Hérault, France : stratigraphie,
minéralogie, paléoenvironnement, corrélations. Thèse d’État, univer-
sité Aix-Marseille, 375p.
Pochat, S., Van den Driessche, J., 2011. Filling sequence in Late Paleozoic
continental basins: a chimera of climate change? A new light given by
the Graissessac-Lodève Basin (SE France). Palaeogeogr., Palaeoclima-
tol., Palaeoecol. 302, 170–186.
Saint-Martin, M., 1992. Genèse et évolution structurale du bassin permien
de Lodève. Cuadernos de Geologica Iberica 16, 81–106.
Saint-Martin, M., 1993. Évolution du bassin stéphanien de Graissessac en
relation avec les tectoniques hercyniennes et tardi-hercyniennes de
la Montagne Noire (Sud du Massif Central franc¸ ais). Thèse, université
Montpellier-2, 235 p.
Schneider, J., Körner, F., Roscher, M., Kroner, U., 2006. Permian cli-
mate development peri-Tethys area. The Lodeve basin, French Massif
Central, compared in a European and global context. Palaeogeogr.,
Palaeoclimatol., Palaeoecol. 240, 161–183.
Teboul, P.A., 2010. Caractérisation pétrographique et minéralogique de
cinérites permiennes du bassin de Lodève (Hérault–France). Rapport
de stage, inédit, UMR 6282, laboratoire de biogéosciences, université
de Bourgogne, 24 p.
Werneburg, R., Steyer, J.S., Sommer, G., Gand, G., Schneider, W.,
Vianey-Liaud, M., 2007. The Earliest Tupilakosaurid amphibian with
diplospondylous vertebrae from the Late Permian of southern France.
J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 27 (1), 26–30.
Zeiller, R., 1898. Contribution à l’étude de la ﬂore ptéridologique des
schistes permiens de Lodève. Bull. Mus. Hist. Nat. Marseille 1, 6–69.